

Caching pairwise sequence alignment scores to improve progressive sequence alignment optimality
===================================================================

1. Given
    - sequences 1......n
    - phlogenetic tree representing the sequences
    - M gap penalty
find an alignment that relates tge sequences

problem:
--------
    Progressive sequence alignment is a heuristic approach that is used in multiple sequence alignment. The approach builds up a final Multiple sequence alignment by combining pairwise alignments beginning with the most similar pair and progressing to the most distantly related. Progressive sequence alignment is a greedy algorithm that makes the most optimal alignment at every step of the alignment. This is a problem because if errors are made in the earlier alignments, they are propagated to the final result. I propose a technique for increasing the optimality of the algorithm. Rather than use a s guide tree as most versions of the progressive sequence alignments algorithms do, I instead store the weights of the respective pairwise sequence alignments. These cached values are then referred to every time we want to align the next sequence to the previous sequences

    
Project outline
---------------
    • Define of the problem with the traditional sequence alignment algorithm as explained above
    • Explore work done by other researcher to improve the progressive sequence alignment problem
    • Propose my new/improved algorithm that looks to improve the shortfalls of the traditional sequence alignment algorithm
    • Test my algorithm on DNA/Protein sequences and compare the results to those generated by traditional sequence alignment algorithms: Speak to Roman for test sequences as suggested by Prof. Waldispühl
    • Interpret results and conclude.


    
proposed improvement
--------------------
1. allign all sequneces
2. sort them in the order of the most related
3. generate tree for the sequences
4. start with the highest related sequnces and allign them
    - take the next highest related sequences and align them
    - do this until all are done

SUDO CODE:
----------

    let s_1, s_2 .....sn be sequences
    initialize M[n][n] score matrix
    initilaize List<List<Integer>> sorted score matrix;

    for s_1 to s_n
        Needlemann-Wunch to align in matrix M
    
    for s_i to s_n
        for s_j to s_n
            if i is not j, for list i, add score M[i][j]
    
    for i = 0 to n-1
        sort list i
    
    build phylogenetic tree guides using neighbour-joining or UPGMA

    
    